docs: Lean coffee retrospective (#2048)
sourcegraph/sourcegraph: doc/dev/retrospectives/index.md

Allocate enough time for team-mates to thoughtfully respond to the survey (aim for 100% participation), but don't let the process take an unbounded amount of time. It is useful to complete the retrospective process expediently so that information is fresh in people's minds and so we can apply learnings sooner. 3 business days is a good default.

### Retrospect, together

Schedule a meeting to discuss the submitted feedback, following this time-boxed approach.

#### Begin

Begin by asking one of the participants to read the [The Prime Directive](http://retrospectivewiki.org/index.php?title=The_Prime_Directive) out loud.

> "Regardless of what we discover, we understand and truly believe that everyone did the best job they could, given what they knew at the time, their skills and abilities, the resources available, and the situation at hand."
> --Norm Kerth, Project Retrospectives: A Handbook for Team Review

This is to assure that a retrospective has the right tone to make it a positive and result oriented event. It makes a retrospective become an effective team gathering to learn and find solutions to improve the way of working together.

> #### Group (10-15 min)

Reviewer: @keegancsmith provided specific feedback about the last retrospective that he felt like we could have done more asynchronously and ahead of time so (1) different timezones can participate equally and (2) people can take more time to be thoughtful.

@keegancsmith What are your thoughts on these proposed changes?

Personally, I do think grouping and voting can happen ahead of time so that the time spent as a group (which is precious and hard to schedule) can be spent on the most valuable part (discussion).

Reviewer 2: Your 2nd point and what is mentioned later in these changes are what made me think doing more async would be positive:

> Ensure you ask everyone what their thoughts on each topic are. Everyone is different; some people are loud and very outspoken. Some are quiet and observe more. It's important to capture everyone's opinions.

I think these changes are positive, and would like to go ahead with them. I do think doing everything before discuss may benefit from being async. The main downside I suppose is you miss out on people explaining there retrospective thought / back and forth to clarify. But that will hopefully ensure that people put more effort into the initial retrospective feedback form.

Reviewer: If something needs to be clarified or is grouped incorrectly, that can be resolved by commenting on the doc or it can be addressed at the beginning of the discussion.

Author: > (1) different timezones can participate equally

I agree with the sentiment and I recognize that it is somewhat at odds with the fact that a huge part of retrospectives is about *connection*, which specially being distributed, is scarce, and all the more important to elevate in the select few occasions where it can occur.

> and (2) people can take more time to be thoughtful.

100% agree with pre-submitting well-reasoned and well-written topics for grouping and voting.

> Personally, I do think grouping and voting can happen ahead of time so that the time spent as a group (which is precious and hard to schedule) can be spent on the most valuable part (discussion).

That being feasible is contingent on the grouping to be *correctly* done by the facilitator ahead of time. Doing that asynchronously is much harder (and slower) than synchronously together with the people whose topics are candidates to be grouped present in the same video call to quickly assess the similarity of their respective topics.

Additionally, you'd have to open voting at a specific time after topic submission is closed and grouping is done. It feels to me that this additional effort is not worth the 10-20 minutes we'd be saving on the meeting.

> Your 2nd point and what is mentioned later in these changes are what made me think doing more async would be positive:
>> Ensure you ask everyone what their thoughts on each topic are. Everyone is different; some people are loud and very outspoken. Some are quiet and observe more. It's important to capture everyone's opinions.

I agree and believe that the element of gathering topics ahead of time is essential to support everyone (shy or not) expressing their concerns and ideas. But that's only half of what we need to extract from these events. *Live discussion* among peers, the human connection that it creates, and the commitments that result is the rest.

Reviewer: > That being feasible is contingent on the grouping to be correctly done by the facilitator ahead of time. Doing that asynchronously is much harder (and slower) than synchronously together...

My mental model is that most grouping won't be that contentious or unambiguous, and that it is valuable to do this ahead of time. It also doesn't seem like a big deal if the facilitator makes a mistake. That mistake can be corrected by commenting on the doc or at the beginning of the discussion.

> Live discussion among peers, the human connection that it creates, and the commitments that result is the rest.

Totally agree, but I don't think that means 100% of this process needs to be done in a live discussion.

How about this compromise:
After voting is complete and >=4 hours before the retro meeting, the facilitator aggregates the raw feedback into a single document (no grouping required) and shares this document with the group. This gives everyone a chance to (1) pre-read other feedback, (2) think about how they might group the feedback into themes, and (3) think about how they might vote. The actual grouping and voting can happen at the beginning of the live discussion, but everyone has had time to prepare/review.

Assemble all of the raw feedback into a single document and group related topics together by theme after every participant has explained to the group each of the topics they submitted.

It's important that participants submit their feedback independently to prevent group-think and the reduce the risk of certain biases.

#### Vote (5-10 min)

> Share this document with the retrospective group and ask each participant to assign five votes (+1s) to the topics that they deem most important. Make sure participants understand that they can distribute their votes as they wish. For example, one participant could place all their votes on a single topic to indicate how important it is to him or her to discuss that idea. On the other hand, another participant could distribute their votes evenly across many topics.

Reviewer: What didn't you like about other approach?

> one participant could place all their votes on a single topic to indicate how important it is to him or her to discuss that idea

One question I have about this approach: could it actually be a problem if a single individual can skew results toward a single topic (e.g. if most people spread their votes evenly but one or two people dump all their votes on a single topic)? I don't know, honestly. The bias in the old plan is to identify those topics which most people agree with. It seems like a nice property that any individual can only vote for a single topic once (instead of, for example, just putting all of your own votes on your own idea, which feels like degenerate behavior).

Reviewer 2: I like this idea. Maybe 5 is too many for the number of participants we will have in our retros, and reducing to say 3 will reduce your concerns @nicksnyder. @tsenart do you have experience with this idea of 5 votes? If so, its a good number to go for and adjust after our next retrospective if needs be.

Author: > What didn't you like about other approach?

It didn't scale. There were topics that were not discussed properly, others that were discussed for too long, and some that weren't discussed at all. In sum, the previous process was missing collective prioritisation of what is most important to **discuss** as opposed to only prioritising what to address (and who should do it).

>  It seems like a nice property that any individual can only vote for a single topic once (instead of, for example, just putting all of your own votes on your own idea, which feels like degenerate behavior).

>  @tsenart do you have experience with this idea of 5 votes? If so, its a good number to go for and adjust after our next retrospective if needs be.

From personal experience, the social dynamics at play in these retrospectives lead to fair judgment from each participant. With great voting power comes great responsibility. I'm confident that everyone will be well aware of this and use their votes fairly.

If there's such a divisive topic that someone feels compelled to assign it all their votes, then we should all listen and pay attention. I don't think the degenerate case is worth worrying about.

@keegancsmith: I've done on-site [Lean Coffee](https://retromat.org/en/?id=51) retrospectives at my previous gig.

Reviewer: > There were topics that were not discussed properly, others that were discussed for too long, and some that weren't discussed at all. In sum, the previous process was missing collective prioritisation of what is most important to discuss as opposed to only prioritising what to address (and who should do it).

It sounds like this is more a comment on what actually happened for 3.0-beta retro (and I agree) vs what is documented on the red side of the diff for next time (which is what my question is aimed at). I think both the green and red side of this diff would result in a better retrospective than what actually happened (we are learning) so I am interested in comparing green against red (not green against what actually happened).

Author: >  I am interested in comparing green against red (not green against what actually happened).

In this respect, they're quite the same: group, vote, sort, discuss, commit. But here are a few key differences:

- The previous text didn't encourage selective voting by allowing each participant to vote in up to half of the topics. Having a few precious votes is a forcing function for us to individually  think about what we think is truly most important to hash out as a group through discussion.

- In the new text there's additional emphasis on time-boxing the discussion of each topic which I think is an important responsibility of the facilitator.

- In the new text it's made explicit that the facilitator should seek the opinion of everyone on each topic that is discussed.

Reviewer: I 100% support points 2 and 3.

>The previous text didn't encourage selective voting by allowing each participant to vote in up to half of the topics. Having a few precious votes is a forcing function for us to individually think about what we think is truly most important to hash out as a group through discussion.

I do think the red diff encourages selective voting (more so than the green proposal even). 

The benefits of the red diff in my mind are:
1. You can't vote on a single topic more than once. The goal here is to prioritize topics that everyone thinks is important (everyone's vote is equal).
2. The number of votes you get is dynamic to the number of themes (i.e. 50%) instead of a fixed number. (1) doesn't seem compatible with a fixed number of votes assuming a variable number of themes. The goal here is to apply some scarcity in votes so it matter what you vote on (i.e. each person roughly divides the themes into "more important" and "less important"). You are not required to spend all you votes (could be clarified).

Author: I think that the ability to vote on one topic more than once, as elaborated in a previous comment, is a feature, not a bug.

I don't see how exactly having  O(N/2) votes promotes scarcity. It's still far too big a number compare to O(k=5).

In any case, this would not be reinventing the wheel. The trade-offs [are well understood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dot-voting). I'm happy disagree but commit to try the red text approach.

Reviewer: > I don't see how exactly having O(N/2) votes promotes scarcity.

If N is large, a small number of fixed votes (e.g. 2 or 3) might make the results too sparse to reveal priority.
If N is small, a small number of fixed votes might not be scarce enough (unless people choose not to use all of their votes).

Maybe those concerns aren't a problem in practice, and I have never actually tried it, so I am willing to defer to something that has been done before.

I actually like the [Lean Coffee](https://retromat.org/en/?id=51) approach as documented, and we have actually used this process in the past here at Sourcegraph (I didn't recognize it by name). Why not adopt exactly that voting method?

Specifically:
> Everyone dot-votes for the 2 topics they want to discuss

This is both limited in the number of votes (I would be ok increasing this number to 3) and seems to imply that you can't vote for a single thing more than once.

- [Sourcegraph 3.0 beta retrospective](3_0_beta.md)

## How to facilitate a retrospective

If you are facilitating a retrospective for a project or release, follow these steps.

### Set the context

Why is this retrospective being held? What will it cover? Retrospectives, similarly to any other meeting, are more effective if the participants align their expectations before getting into it.

Be sure that everyone understands the answers to the above questions before proceeding.

### Collect feedback

Identify everyone who should participate in the retrospective: this is the retrospective group. This should include everyone who participated in the project or release.

Collect written answers to the following questions from everyone in the retrospective group.

1. What should we start doing?

1. What should we stop doing?

1. What should we continue doing?

> The medium through which you collect answers to these questions is not important (e.g. Google Docs, Google Forms, Slack messages), but it is important that participants submit their feedback independently to prevent group-think and the reduce the risk of certain biases.

Author: ```suggestion
The medium through which you collect answers to these questions is not important (e.g. Google Docs, Google Forms, Slack messages), but it is important that participants submit their feedback independently to prevent group-think and reduce the risk of certain biases.
```

Allocate enough time for teammates to thoughtfully respond to the survey (aim for 100% participation), but don't let the process take an unbounded amount of time. It is useful to complete the retrospective process expediently so that information is fresh in people's minds and so we can apply learnings sooner. 3 business days is a good default.

### Share feedback

> After the feedback period it over aggregate all of the raw feedback into a single document and then share that document with the team so everyone can see the results at least one working day before the retrospective meeting.

Author: ```suggestion
After the feedback period is over, aggregate all of the raw feedback into a single document and share it with the group so everyone can have at least one working day before the retrospective meeting to go over the results.
```

### Retrospect, together

Schedule a meeting to discuss the submitted feedback, following this time-boxed approach.

#### Begin

Begin by asking one of the participants to read the [The Prime Directive](http://retrospectivewiki.org/index.php?title=The_Prime_Directive) out loud.

> "Regardless of what we discover, we understand and truly believe that everyone did the best job they could, given what they knew at the time, their skills and abilities, the resources available, and the situation at hand."
> --Norm Kerth, Project Retrospectives: A Handbook for Team Review

This is to assure that a retrospective has the right tone to make it a positive and result oriented event. It makes a retrospective become an effective team gathering to learn and find solutions to improve the way of working together.

#### Group (10-15 min)

The goal is to read through each raw feedback item and group related topics together by theme.

Have the author of each feedback item read it out loud and answer any questions. Then ask the author to propose a new or existing theme for this feedback item.

#### Vote (5 min)

> After all feedback items have been organized into themes, ask each participant to assign three votes (+1s) to the topics that they deem most important. Make sure participants understand that they can distribute their votes as they wish. For example, one participant could place all their votes on a single topic to indicate how important it is to him or her to discuss that idea. On the other hand, another participant could distribute their votes evenly across many topics.

Author: ```suggestion
After all feedback items have been organized into themes, ask each participant to assign three votes (+1s) to the topics that they deem most important. Make sure participants understand that they can distribute their votes as they wish, as long as they assign all their votes. For example, one participant could place all their votes on a single topic to indicate how important it is to him or her to discuss that idea. On the other hand, another participant could distribute their votes evenly across many topics.
```

Reviewer: I moved the rules to a bullet list for easier readability.
